Deepseek just released its latest model.
This new model delivers state-of-the-art
performance across a broad range of
benchmarks. But the real story is its
remarkable long context efficiency.
Compared to the previous DeepSseek V3.2,
the new model dramatically cuts
inference compute and memory. Let's see
how its new attention design makes this
possible. When a transformer model
processes a sequence of tokens, each
encoded as a D-dimensional vector, the
attention mechanism enables the model to
capture context and build a richer
understanding of the sequence.
But this creates a major challenge.
Memory usage grows linearly with
sequence lens. Typically, each embedding
vector has a dimensionality of several
thousand, but the sequence lens can
easily grow to millions.
Let's first briefly review the standard
attention mechanism to set the stage.
The attention layer uses query, key, and
value matrices to linearly project each
hidden state into query, key, and value
vectors.
We compute the attention output by
taking a weighted sum of the value
vectors where the weights are determined
by the scale dotproduct between each
query and key vector. This process
produces a C-dimensional output vector
for each token. Therefore, we use an
output matrix WO to project the output
vectors back to the same dimensionality
as the hidden states.
This output matrix has dimension C by D.
We then add these residual embeddings
back to the original token embeddings to
inject the contextual information.
Self attention allows the model to
enrich each embedding with context from
the entire sequence, ensuring that every
refined embedding captures all relevant
relationships and details. But relying
on just a single set of query, key, and
value matrices is insufficient to
capture the full complexity of
relationships between tokens. To address
this, we introduce multiple sets of
query, key, and value matrices, allowing
the model to learn and represent a
diverse range of relationships between
tokens.
This is achieved by expanding the query
key and value matrices to include
multiple attention heads. Here h is the
number of heads. We show four heads in
the illustration but in practice the
number can be much larger such as 128.
We split the query key and value
matrices into edge heads and compute
attention for each head separately.
This gives us a collection of attention
outputs 01, O2, 03, and O4.
We concatenate the outputs of the
multiple heads together and use our
output matrix WO to produce the residual
embeddings delta H. This is known as
multi head attention. Let's now
visualize this more concisely. In
standard multi head attention during
inference or decoding we must cache the
key and value vectors from all previous
tokens.
Therefore the total key value cache
memory is two for keys and values times
the head dimension times the precision
in bytes times the number of heads times
the number of layers times the sequence
lengths.
This is a lot of memory. How do we
reduce the memory cost? One simple idea
is to reduce the number of heads for key
and value matrices from H to one. In
this setup, we generate just a single
set of key and value vectors for each
token. The key and value vectors are
then shared across all attention hands.
This approach is called multi-query
attention or MQA for short. Let's
compare the memory requirements of MQA
with the standard multi head attention.
Multi head attention requires 4 mgabytes
of memory per token. In contrast, MQA
requires only 31 kilob of memory per
token. It's a 128fold reduction in
memory usage. However, there's a catch.
By sharing key and value vectors across
all heads, MQA reduces its ability to
model nuance relationships between
tokens. As a result, MQA's performance
degrades considerably compared to the
original multi head attention. This
limitation has inspired several
subsequent innovations such as grouped
query attention, GQA, and multi-head
latent attention, MLA.
But all of these methods focus on the
number of attention heads. Instead,
Deepseek's new attention mechanism
shifts the focus from the number of
heads to the sequence lens.
So, how do we compress the KV cache
along the sequence dimension?
Here we have a sequence of 16 tokens.
Each token embedding is a 7,168
dimensional vector.
We extract the key value information
using a matrix W KV.
This maps the D-dimensional hidden state
to a lower dimensional vector we call a
key value entry. In the deepsev4 model,
the dimension C is set to 512.
The computation can be concisively
expressed as a single matrix matrix
multiplication.
Intuitively, not all tokens carry the
same level of importance.
Therefore, we can compress a group of
key value entries into one. For example,
by compressing groups of four key value
entries into one, we achieve a four-fold
reduction in memory usage.
But how exactly does this compression
work? The simplest approach is to
average the four KV entries.
This works, but clearly it's not ideal.
Information from an important token may
be diluted by the other tokens in its
group. To address this, we use data
dependent waiting. More specifically, we
compute a scalar score for each token in
the group using a dotproduct between its
hidden state and a learn weight vector.
We then pass the scores through a
softmax function to obtain weights S1 to
S4. These weights determine how much
each token contributes to the compressed
KV entry.
This allows the model to adaptively
emphasize the most informative tokens
within each group rather than treating
all tokens equally.
The result is a compressed set of key
and value entries that captures the most
relevant context across longer
sequences.
But these key value entries are
512dimensional vectors. Using a single
scalar weight means that every dimension
of a token's KB vector gets scaled by
the same amount.
Therefore, we generalize these scalar
weights to per dimension weights.
More precisely, the model computes a
distinct weight for each dimension
across the 512dimensional
KV vectors using the softmax function.
This gives the model fine grained
control over which features to retain
using a weighted sum with learned per
dimension weights, preserving more
detailed information than simple scalar
waiting.
This element wise multiplication can be
more compactly represented using matrix
notation.
This matrix which produces per dimension
scores before the softmax function is
denoted wz.
However, when we visualize the key value
vector compression process, we notice
that there are artificial boundaries
between the compressed vectors.
In other words, each compressed vector
is formed from a separate non-over
overlapping group of key value vectors.
The outcome can vary greatly depending
on how the tokens are grouped. To
address this limitation, we incorporate
overlapping groups of vectors, allowing
each compressed entry to draw context
from both its current group and adjacent
groups of key value vectors.
We first expand the key value vectors
and the corresponding weight matrix for
the previous group so that each key
value vector is included in multiple
overlapping windows.
For each overlapping window, we compute
the per dimension weights as before,
obtaining a new set of softmax weights
for that group.
Each token's weighted key value vector
is shared across overlapping groups. So
its information contributes to multiple
compressed entries.
This overlapping compression scheme
enables a smoother transition of
information across groups, mitigating
the harsh boundaries imposed by non-over
overlapping compression and better
preserving important contextual signals
throughout the sequence.
We refer to this process as the token
level compressor.
Now we are ready to integrate the token
level compressor into the attention
computation.
Let's start from the standard multi head
attention diagram. We first reduce the
number of key and value vectors from h
heads to one. This is the multi-query
attention MQA.
Next, we project each hidden state to a
shared key value entry using the matrix
WKV.
Then, we compress the key value entries
across the sequence lens using the token
level compressor.
Like multi-query attention, the
compressed key value entries are shared
across all attention heads.
Thanks to token level compression, each
attention head can now use a higher
dimensional key value vector, 512
dimensions per head instead of the
typical 128 dimensions.
But this poses additional computational
challenges. For example, when computing
the query vector, we need to transform
the d-dimensional vector into a vector
with C * H dimensions.
Substituting in the actual parameter
values, we see that WQ becomes an
extremely large matrix.
To make this more parameter efficient,
we take a low rank approach. We first
project the hidden state H to obtain a
compressed latent vector for the queries
using a down projection matrix WQ down.
Then we produce the attention queries by
op projecting the latent vector using
the op projection matrix WQ up. This low
rank approximation reduces the parameter
count to just 15.8%
of what would be required for the full
WQ matrix.
We also have a similar problem for the
output matrix WO.
To mitigate the substantial
computational burden, we split the
output dimension into G groups. Each
group now has a dimension of C * H
divided by G. We introduce a down
projection matrix WO down which maps
each output group to a lower dimensional
vector of size NG.
Finally, we project the concatenated
output to the final attention output
using an up projection matrix W up. This
reduces the number of parameters to only
14.3% of the full WO matrix. We call
this strategy grouped output projection.
But even with token compression, we
still need to calculate the attention
between the current token and all
preceding compressed key value entries.
This results in a slower tokens per
second throughput.
To fix this, we leverage a lightning
indexer. The core idea is to efficiently
score each compressed KV entry and
select only the most relevant ones for
the full attention computation.
This selective mechanism is known as
deepsek sparse attention or DSA.
Please refer to our previous video for a
deeper introduction.
By combining compressed key value
entries with DSA's sparse selection
mechanism, we arrive at compressed
sparse attention CSA for short. We've
skipped a few implementation details
here. Let me briefly walk through them.
When generating tokens auto
reggressively, in addition to attending
to past compressed KV entries, we must
also attend to tokens within a local
window that have not yet been
compressed.
To prevent exploding attention logits
and enhance a training stability, we
apply normalization to each query head
and to the compressed key value entries.
Like in multi head latent attention, we
apply rotary position embeddings to part
of the query and key value entry
vectors. Finally, we introduce a set of
learnable attention sync logits. These
sync logits serve as dedicated entries
that absorb excess attention mass
thereby encouraging more stable
training. Deepseek v4 also uses a
complimentary mechanism heavily
compressed attention or HCA.
Compared to the compression ratio of
four in CSA, HCA compresses every 128
tokens into a single key value entry.
This aggressive compression not only
dramatically reduces the size of the KV
cache, but also enables the model to
efficiently aggregate information from
extremely long sequences. By summarizing
large spans of tokens into compact key
value summaries, HCA allows the model to
reason over much longer context without
a proportional increase in computation
or memory.
Because HCA's compression is so
aggressive, dense attention over all
compressed entries is already efficient,
no sparse selection needed.
Together, CSA and HCA form a
complimentary pair. CSA preserves local
detail through sparse selection, while
HCA maintains broad global context
through heavy compression.
Let's zoom out to see how these pieces
fit together in the pro architecture.
We start with the token embedding as
inputs.
Each transformer block contains an
attention layer followed by a mixture of
experts layer. The first two layers use
HCA to build a cheap global summary of
the entire sequence, letting information
mix across long context before the model
commits to fine- grain processing. In
the middle portion of the model, the
architecture alternates between HCA and
the more selective CSA layers.
This design enables the network to
repeatedly switch between forming broad
global summaries of the sequence and
engaging in focused highresolution
interactions.
By alternating between these two forms
of compressed attention, Deepseek V4
incrementally refineses its internal
representations, efficiently shuttling
information across multiple levels of
abstraction without incurring the full
quadratic computation at every layer.
Finally, the last layer uses full
attention to reintegrate everything at
full token resolution.
This recovers details that compression
may have blurred, producing the most
accurate output logits.
This schedule balances efficiency with
expressivity, early global context, mid
layer iterative refinement, and a
precise final readout.
I hope you enjoy this overview of
compressed attention. Thanks for
watching and I'll see you next